---
layout: post
title:  "Halloween 2015: Anglerfish"
date:   2015-11-03 09:41:51
categories: electronics
---

So, this year I chose to try and build my own costume. Complete with simple
electronics!

I dressed up as an [Anglerfish](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anglerfish),
largely of *Finding Nemo* fame:

<img src="/static/anglerfish_nemo.jpg">

The idea for the costume was shamelessly stolen by me from someone I saw in
Oakland earlier in October: they had used a black hoodie as a base to attach big
eyes and teeth. Brilliant! Let's copy it and make it even better!

# The Setup

I started by rigging up a prototype using tape and safety pins:

<img src="/static/anglerfish_prototype.jpg">

The teeth are white felt, and the eyes are a sphere of styrofoam cut in half.
The antenna-like attachment is made using black picture frame wire, with the
base in a loop that threads through the top of the hoodie. The dangly bit is a
punctured table tennis ball, with the branding sanded off.

...I really wanted the antenna-like to glow. Pulsate, even. My electronics
skills are fledgling, but I felt that lighting up an LED was within my skillset.
I built this simple circuit to start:

<img src="/static/anglerfish_electronics.jpg">

This is just an LED with a 220 Ohm resistor, with each end attached to a 4.5
foot long wire that I twisted together to form a single thread.

This was so I could thread the LED wiring through the top of the hoodie, down
along the inside, and then through the left pocket, where it's attached to a
potentiometer and a 3V battery pack.

The potentiometer is just a knob, like this fella:

<img src="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b5/Potentiometer.jpg/220px-Potentiometer.jpg">

It lets me control how much current goes through the LED, so I could just stick
my hands in my pockets and make the dial turn left and right, manually pulsing
the glow whenever I wanted to.

Here's the final result on its mount (an empty water jug is shaped a lot like a
human head, it turns out):

<img src="/static/anglerfish_complete.jpg">


# What Went Right, What Went Wrong

Cutting and affixing the teeth with plain safety pins turned out to be both
quick and easy.

The eyes were attached with hot glue. Again, this worked like a charm and showed
no sign of falling off.

My idea to thread the LED circuit down through the interior of the hoodie so I
could control it from my pocket mostly worked well. However, it also proved to
be another component that could get tangled up when the hoodie was being put on
or taken off or transported, if I wasn't careful.

I didn't have soldering equipment handy, so I improvised using hot glue and
electrical tape. Surprisingly: not bad! I'd twist the wires together, coat them
in hot glue, and then wrap electrical tape around them. This mostly worked, but
proved unreliable. I had to do several of the connections multiple times, and
mid-evening on Halloween night one of the connections to the potentiometer
became loose and required manual fiddling to help it maintain contact. In the
future I definitely won't skimp: soldering tools are the way to go.

Draw your circuit diagrams beforehand, folks. I shorted two LEDs and one
potentiometer. Turns out green LEDs will glow orange when you put too much
current through them. The red ones will just fizzle and die. The potentiometer
must emitted a puff of smoke, a brief glow, and died.


# It's Over!

This was a lot of fun! I'm looking forward to getting my hands dirty with more
electronics, and building something more elaborate next year!

And, finally, of course: a dark, blurry shot me wearing the darned thing:

<center><img src="/static/anglerfish_final.jpg" width="50%"></center>

