## Donations

### Thu Mar 29 14:04:14 CEST 2018

Writing open source is not a good way to make lots of money.

Some people are trying to change that, like Kyle Mitchell's [License
Zero](https://licensezero.com).

Others are setting up Patreon or LibrePay pages and asking the community for
donations to support their work: the time and effort that goes into building
quality, free software. Feross wrote a beautiful tool called
[thanks](https://github.com/feross/thanks) for finding out who makes the node.js
modules that power your software, and making donations to them.

I really admire the collective effort of the community in this. I know so many
developers who work to create amazing things that anybody can use, without
asking for a dime in return. This is the core of gift economics: giving freely
without expectation of return.

But gift economics has a second half, that is equally important: *receiving*
freely, without obligation of return.

Globalized society is driven by money: credit & debt, and precisely equal
exchange. Coupled with a mindset of scarcity, it makes sense what happens when
open source developers share their work online for free: they are pillaged. Not
unlike a corporation finding a valuable natural resource (gas, oil, trees,
hunter-gatherer peoples), interpreting natural as *free*, and proceeding to
exploit it in order to convert that resource into profit.

A couple of months ago I was inspired by my peers asking for donations for their
work, and decided to run an experiment by setting up a LibrePay page of my own.
Only a small amount of money has come in, but I quickly felt like something
wasn't right. So I'm terminating the experiment.

I'm trying to figure out why. Maybe it's because I already feel like I have
enough? I'm privileged enough to work at a non-profit where I get to write open
source software *and* get paid for it. I get by comfortably on what I make,
though it is less than a third of what I once made at Google.

Another aspect is the problematicness of money itself. If someone were to be
kind enough to give me a gift, I'd prefer something more real: a cooked meal
shared; a skill shared; a pull request contributed back to one of my projects; a
day spent hiking together; even just a conversation. It's so easy to use money
as a substitute for any of these. Thanks to money I can send dollars to a
favourite open source developer and not even need to talk to them, or have them
know who I am. This feels really dangerous to me. A community thrives on human
interaction, and money facilitates this nameless wordless precise exchange.

In the [Moneyless Manifesto](https://moneylessmanifesto.org), Mark Boyle points
out that if someone did an act of kindess for you, like offer you a bed for a
night, and in the morning you paid them what you computed to be the fair market
rate for a bed in their part of the city, what would happen to that
relationship? I think it fades away. The debt is [precisely] repaid, and there's
nothing left to say or do. Bonds seem to form with the introduction of an
unbalanced debt that goes outside the realm of money and exact credit/debt. I'm
still chewing on this.

In short: if you appreciate or benefit from the things I make or share, let me
know. Say hi. Send a patch. Cook us a warm meal. Show me a new neighbourhood.
Let's form a connection instead of making a mechanical monetary exchange.

So, how can the gift economics of open source work while embedded in such a
system of methodical abuse? I don't know. I think it's important to prevent the
gift economics culture of open source from being exploited by corporations. I
think it's important to have tight-knit communities where people can support
each other. [Secure Scuttlebutt](https://scuttlebutt.nz) is doing a good job of
exploring this right now: if this articles resonates with you and you aren't on
SSB, come by and say hello!

